Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Crews. Poul Anderson is one of a small group of
science fiction authors who have written future histories. A future history is a
group of stories or novels written along a consistent timeline in the future.
Characters may or may not recur, but the intention is to speculate on the
evolution of human society beyond the present day. Anderson actually has written
two future histories. The first is not as best known, and it consists of only a
dozen or so stories. Anderson began it in the late 1940s. But I started out
originally rather
early in my career and more or less inspired by Heinlein's future history and
constructed one of my own with charts and background material and so on like
his. Of course, in mine the events were different. But basically I wanted to do
a similar job that is fictionally tell about the story of mankind from almost
the present day and the early era of expansion among the stars. This wasn't
going to be the only thing I did by any means. I would write other things that
were not in the series.
But from time to time I'd add something to it, and I did over the years.
Some of the stories in this future history are Wolf, "Quixote and the Windmill",
Cold Victory, and the Snows of Ganymede. The earliest stories in this series
describe World War III, which Anderson had set in 1958, a war that destroys
modern civilization. But out of the war, decades later, rose a new civilization.
It was a repressive one, dominated by the Psychotechnic Institute, an
organization which strictly plans and controls human progress through
psychological manipulation. Anderson carefully traces out the social, political,
and technological events which shaped the new society. He describes the
colonization of Venus and Mars, for instance, the development of robotics and
artificial regeneration, and the struggle toward a true world government. In one
story, The Troublemakers, he sends a space arc off to Alpha Centauri in a voyage
that will take 123 years. But overall, things don't go smoothly. Anderson
envisions society undergoing many upheavals. In "Quixote and the Windmill", for
instance, there are violent anti-robot riots. And in Cold Victory, a humanist
revolution occurs which overthrows a Psychotechnic Institute. But some of the
Institute's people escape to Ganymede, the largest of Jupiter's moons, where
they continue fighting. It isn't until the story break, the last one in this
particular future history, that the Institute is totally wiped out. At this
point, around the 23rd century, the human race is ready to attempt interstellar
colonization. Anderson leaves it there at the beginning of a new era. He
explains why he added no more to it. But gradually, for a number of reasons, got
less and less interested in continuing, and started phasing it out, doing less
and less of it. One reason for being less interested was that, as for the early
part of it, reality was catching up with me. Not only were public or political
events not working out on my timetable, for example, World War III did not come
off on schedule, but also, it turned out I had failed to foresee a number of
scientific and technological developments. Anderson's second future history is
much larger and better known. It includes some of the most memorable characters
he's created, like Nicholas van Rijn and Dominic Flandry. We'll talk with
Anderson about that series next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Daryl Lane. Poul Anderson has written one of the most
ambitious and extensive future histories in science fiction. It's usually called
the future history of the Polesotechnic League, although a better term might be
the League and Empire series. We asked Anderson how the future history got its
start. Now that has a history much more like that of Topsy. It just grew.
Originally, I'd written a few stories about Nicholas Van Rijn, and I'd written a
few stories about Dominic Flandry, who lived in completely different milieus, of
course. And then one day on an impulse, I thought, well, gosh, they could be on
the same timeline, one living about 500 years after the other. And threw in
mention of that in one of the Flandry stories, and then started fitting in other
stories wherever it was convenient. You see, the thing with the future history
is that although each story should, of course, be readable independently of any
others, and comprehensible and so on, nevertheless, if you have a reader who
remembers a number of them, the cross-connections will add an extra dimension,
and thereby, I hope, add to his enjoyment. So, I started doing it that way, and
after a while, realized I had a rather large beast by the tail. If I was going
to stay consistent at all, then I had to keep careful notes, and I had to
develop a systematic scheme, and so on. And thus, over the years, one thing led
to another, until it all became rather elaborate. By now, it includes, oh, I
think something like 40 separate items, of which probably at least a third or so
are full-dressed novels. The first story Nicholas van Rijn turned up in was the
novel The Man Who Counts, which was also issued as The War of the Wingmen. van
Rijn is a non-heroic type. He's a fat, loud-mouthed, cursing schemer who favors
good food, drink, and creature comforts. But using his wits, he usually conquers
all of his foes, human or alien. He establishes the Polesotechnic League, a
trading guild which carries Earth culture throughout the stars. We asked
Anderson if van Rijn has been popular with readers. Oh, yes. There are some
readers who can't stand him, but they don't ignore him either, and as for the
rest, he probably is the most popular character I've ever come up with. Then,
about 500 years along the timeline of his future history, Anderson introduces
Dominic Flandry, an agent for the Terran Empire. He turns up in books like
Ensign Flandry, The Rebel Worlds, Earthman Go Home!, and A Knight of Ghosts and
Shadows. The Flandry stories are set in the 31st century and involve the Terran
Empire struggle with its powerful alien antagonist, the Merseians. Flandry is the
opposite of van Rijn. He's smooth, sophisticated, suave, a man who can either
fight or scheme with equal style and flair. He reminds a reader of James Bond.
We asked Anderson if the relationship was intentional. Oh, no. No, I've been
asked this before, and as a matter of fact, the first Flandry story appeared
something like 20 years before the first James Bond story did. If I was modeling
on any other character at all, it would probably have had to be somebody like
the saint. Anderson says he probably won't be adding any more to the future
history of the Polesotechnic League and the Terran Empire, but there's enough
material there already to keep a science fiction reader busy for a long time.
We'll have some more on Poul Anderson next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Crews. A number of science fiction authors employ
the technique of world building in their stories. Poul Anderson is one of the
best at world building. He explains the term. The term simply means to the,
simply refers to the construction of an imaginary world as a setting for a story
in considerable detail. Now, lots of people have done this. An obvious example,
for example, would be J.R.R. Tolkien in The Lord of the Rings and related
stories. He constructs an imaginary world in vast detail, complete down to fine
points of the various languages spoken and so on. Anderson's first extensive
attempt at world building was the planet Diomedes, which was a setting for his
novel The Man Who Counts. He meticulously constructs the planet in detail that
allows winged intelligent beings. The atmosphere, for example, is very heavy,
which is necessary to support a large flying creature. Anderson explains why he
spends so much time constructing his planets in consistent and careful detail.
After all, we really cannot reasonably expect that any other planet anywhere in
the universe will be very much like Earth. We'll probably be lucky if we find a
few where humans can live without artificial help.
And you're certainly not going to have native humans around there or oak trees
or rabbits or any other feature that we know here on Earth. That's just
preposterous to suppose on the basis of everything we know about the evolution
of life here on Earth. So, in that case, let's try to set up some of the
features which are different. After all, one reason people read science fiction
is precisely that they like to get away from the world around them once in a
while and escape into something exotic. and in my opinion, to the extent that
this exotic thing can be made at the same time realistic and convincing, the
reader is getting his money's worth.
Almost any world constructed by Anderson in his science fiction stories is put
together with attention given to basic scientific laws. Anderson, after all, was
a physics student in college and knows his science. Other authors, Hal Clement
and Larry Niven come to mind, practice careful world building too. In fact,
Clement says his science fiction novel challenges its readers to find any
scientific errors committed by the author. Clement calls this The Game. Anderson
elaborates on it. The Game consists in an author setting up a world or a
situation or something the very best he can and writing a story about it. And
then, then that's all he can do. He's made his move and that's it. And readers
are free to, thereafter, to try to figure out from the story exactly what he had
in mind and exactly where he may have gone wrong. So I've gotten some very
interesting mail on technical points. And, yes, sometimes they have indicated to
me that I've goofed on this or that detail, but all right. One learns from that.
I don't mind. With Anderson and with other world builders, a reader gets a bonus
to accompany an exciting narrative, interesting and accurate science. More with
Poul Anderson in our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews and Daryl Lane. Poul Anderson is noted both as a master
world builder and as a creator of believable aliens. He matches aliens to their
planets with meticulous and loving care and with great concern for scientific
accuracy. One of the best examples of his talents in this area is the race of
winged creatures included in his future history of the Polesotechnic League.
Actually, he constructed two separate races of winged beings. The Diomedians
from the Nicholas van Rijn novel, The Man Who Counts, and the Ythrians of the
planet Avalon. Anderson explains how he got interested in intelligent beings
with the ability to fly. Oh, way back when, many years ago, I mean many years
ago, it's about 40 by now, L. Sprague de Camp had published an article on
intelligent non-human beings where he used basic physical principles to demolish
a number of notions, you know, like the idea of a giant insect and so on. It's
just impossible. It would collapse under its own weight because it hasn't got
the structure to support that weight, things like that. And one thing he doubted
was that you could have an intelligent being which flies
because the wing loading that a living flyer can absorb is or take is so small
that there just wouldn't be room for a sizable brain. Anderson thought about De
Camp's arguments and at last came to at least a partial solution. Well, science
fiction writers tend to take this sort of a thing as a challenge. And so when I
wrote The Man Who Counts quite a while ago, I
did have winged intelligent beings, but I designed the planet such that it had a
very dense atmosphere,
which of course would make it easier to get about in the air. I also made them
essentially six-limbed so that they could have not only wings but legs and
hands. Well, afterward I got to thinking that that had been a kind of a cop-out.
Couldn't there be some way to do it better? Could it conceivably be done on an
Earth-like planet? I couldn't see any way. De Camp's arguments were there and
they made sense. At this point, the famous science fiction editor, John W.
Campbell, came to the rescue. Well, then it happened the very last time I saw
the late John W. Campbell. I was in New York and visited his office and we went
out to lunch together. This was not long before his death. And we sat there
talking. And during their conversation, Anderson brought up the problem of
constructing a large intelligent creature who could fly. Campbell suggested a
way to do it. And he immediately said, well, suppose it had some sort of leg
-driven supercharging
bellows. That would give it tremendous cursive ability. And I immediately saw
that this was a way to power a winged animal, give it sufficient energy that it
actually could fly in an atmosphere like our own.
Although it might weigh as much as 100 pounds. So on this hint, Anderson created
the Ithrians of the planet Avalon. The People of the Wind is probably the best
known of his novels involving the Ithrians, but Anderson used them in a number
of stories in his Polesotechnic League future history. Next time we'll have more
with Poul Anderson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Crews. One of the present masters of science
fiction and fantasy, an author whose work stretches back four decades into the
golden age of science fiction, is Poul Anderson. It's hard to type Anderson.
He's a full-time professional who writes all kinds of fantasy and science
fiction. He's known as a writer of hard science, for example, which can be seen
in novels like Tau Zero or The Man Who Counts, a fine example of world building.
He's constructed two future histories. The best-known one in the history of the
Polesotechnic League contains some of his most famous characters and some of his
most fascinating alien cultures. Some of the best of contemporary fantasy comes
from his pen also, in novels like The Broken Sword and Three Hearts and Three
Lions. And he sometimes writes tongue-in-cheek spoofs, as in his novel The High
Crusade, in which the medieval warriors with swords conquer a space-faring
galactic civilization. Anderson has won numerous Nebula and Hugo Awards for his
fiction, and he served as president of the Science Fiction Writers of America.
He knows the field like few others do. We asked him if science fiction has
changed in the years he's been writing it. Oh, yes, there have been a great many
changes.
Back around 1940 or so, well, practically all you could get, unless you hark
back to a few writers like Wells and Verne, practically all you could get was in
a few pulp magazines.
Nowadays, of course, there's an overwhelming flood of it. It is not possible to
read all which appears. Anderson thinks the image of science fiction has changed
over the years. And also, of course, it's no longer disreputable. It's become
quite respectable.
You know, when I was your age, it was unthinkable that anybody could arrange a
telephone interview with one of the writers of it under the auspices of a
college, for heaven's sake. Good Lord, this was pulp fiction. It was beyond the
pale. Nowadays, it's been taught in college courses and all this other stuff, you
know.
He believes science fiction has had an important impact on the public, and he tells us why he thinks science fiction is
valuable. Actually, all this is kind of trivial. I think the important thing is
that the basic concepts have sort of permeated the public mind. I think people
are aware of that nowadays in a way that they never used to be aware, that the
future is going to be different from the past. It may be better. It may be
worse, whatever. But it's going to be different and in very fundamental ways.
And they tend to accept this, be prepared for it. I often say that perhaps the
most important public service that science fiction is doing is by casting a
certain glamour over science and technology. It recruits a lot of young people
into these fields. And good heaven knows we need an awful lot of scientists and
technologists. Anderson is still going strong today. You'll find his latest work
at any bookstore.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.